# College-Baseball-Stuff-Plus-2024

Welcome to the repository for my Stuff+ model! Stuff+ is a metric that has become exceedingly popular in the baseball world over the last few years. It aims to measure how "nasty" a pitch is based on its velocity, movement, release point, and apporach angles. It is often done by predicting the expected run value or expected whiff rate for a pitch and comparing it to the average for the pitch type. My Stuff+ model predicts expected whiff rate (xWhiff), then converts the xWhiff to Stuff+ by computing its percent above or below average and adding it to 100. So, a fastball with an xWhiff 50% higher than average fastballs has a Stuff+ of 150. Similarly, a slider with an xWhiff 15% below the average breaking ball has a Stuff+ of 85.

More explanation about Stuff+ can be found at this article by Jack Lambert at Driveline Baseball: https://www.drivelinebaseball.com/2024/05/revisiting-stuff-plus/?srsltid=AfmBOop8_HQfAcpNc0AZPdG_npFfDNEFw3JG0n0wIjjh2gYwL6dYQopp

To train the model, I gathered all pitches recorded by a TrackMan at a NCAA Division 1 stadium and split them into 3 groups. The Fastball group contains all Four Seam Fastballs, Sinkers (or Two Seam Fastballs, if you prefer), and Cutters thrown by a pitcher whose primary fastball is a cutter. The Breaking Ball group contains all Curveballs, Sliders, and Cutters thrown by a pitcher whose primary fastball is not a cutter (more on why is explained in the notebook). The Offspeed group contains all Changeups, Splitters, and Knuckleballs. Each group is trained separately and has its own model associated with it. Each model is a Random Forest Classifier that predicts the probability of a whiff using the pitch's velocity, induced vertical break, horizontal break, release height, release side, extension, adjusted vertical approach angle, and adjusted horizontal approach angle. Three additional features, velocity difference, IVB difference, and HB difference are included in the breaking ball and offspeed model to capture movement differences from that pitcher's fastball. 

The notebook in the repository contains all of my code, visualizations, comments, and explanations about why I made certain choices in my model. It is a great resource for anyone looking to build their own Stuff+ model!
